---
title: "4. ComponentBuilder"
date: 2020-08-23T18:00:20-04:00
---

Last time we saw how an implementation of a server over the notification server framework looks like. We discussed code of events, logics and rules. Something we have not discussed yet is how do we link components to one another. This is something that is resolved via a mechanism called **component builder**.

The component builder is an interface provided by the notification server framework, where one defines the components of a specific server and defines the links between these components. It consists of a single method:

```csharp
public interface IComponentBuilder
{
    void BuildComponents(IRuntimeContext context);
}
```

The interface `IRuntimeContext` is an interface which provides information about our server. It will be discussed in another post. `IRuntimeContext` has a property named `Components` which is of type `IComponentContainer`. `IComponentContainer` is, as its name suggests, a container of the server components, and it extends (inherits from) the interface `ICollection<IComponent>`. I don't want to go into details about the interfaces `IComponent` and `IComponentContainer`, so for now let's just assume that all components implement the interface `IComponent`.

In the method `BuildComponents` we are expected to create the components of our server and link them one another. Let us demonstrate using the fractal processing server sample we discussed last time:

```csharp
public class FractalProcessingServerComponentBuilder : IComponentBuilder
{
    public void BuildComponents(IRuntimeContext context)
    {
        // Create components
        RequestListener requestListener = new RequestListener();
        PixelGeneratorLogic pixelGeneratorLogic = new PixelGeneratorLogic();
        PixelToComplexConvertLogic pixelToComplexConvertLogic = new PixelToComplexConvertLogic();
        MandelbrotLogic mandelbrotLogic = new MandelbrotLogic();
        JuliaLogic juliaLogic = new JuliaLogic();
        ColorConvertLogic colorConvertLogic = new ColorConvertLogic();
        PixelStoreLogic pixelStoreLogic = new PixelStoreLogic();
        BitmapConvertLogic bitmapConvertLogic = new BitmapConvertLogic();
        FileSystemDispatcher fileSystemDispatcher = new FileSystemDispatcher();

        // Add components to component container
        IComponentContainer componentContainer = context.Components;
        componentContainer.Add(pixelGeneratorLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(pixelToComplexConvertLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(mandelbrotLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(juliaLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(colorConvertLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(pixelStoreLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(bitmapConvertLogic);
        componentContainer.Add(fileSystemDispatcher);

        // Link components
        // Upper chain
        requestListener.Subscribe(pixelGeneratorLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        pixelGeneratorLogic.Subscribe(pixelToComplexConvertLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        pixelToComplexConvertLogic.Subscribe(mandelbrotLogic, new MandelbrotRule());
        pixelToComplexConvertLogic.Subscribe(juliaLogic, new JuilaRule());
        mandelbrotLogic.Subscribe(colorConvertLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        juliaLogic.Subscribe(colorConvertLogic, new ActivateAllRule());

        // Lower chain:
        requestListener.Subscribe(pixelStoreLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        colorConvertLogic.Subscribe(pixelStoreLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        pixelStoreLogic.Subscribe(bitmapConvertLogic, new ActivateAllRule());
        bitmapConvertLogic.Subscribe(fileSystemDispatcher, new ActivateAllRule());
    }
}
```

As we can see, we first create an instance of each component of our server, then add all the component instances to the `Components` property of the provided `IRuntimeContext`. Then we perform the links. We perform the links by calling a method called `Subscribe`. Every component which is not a target component (i.e., it allows other components to be linked to it) implements an interface called `IPublisher` which contains a method with the following signature:

```csharp
public interface IPublisher
{
    void Subscribe(IRecipient recipient, IRule rule);
    // ...
}
```

Again, I do not wish to discuss the interface `IRecipient` right now, but every component which is not a source component (i.e., it allows other components to link to it) implements `IRecipient`. The `Subscribe` method tells the publisher we are interested in receiving events that pass the given rule. This is always confusing for new developers, as they expect `Subscribe` to be a method of the subscriber, but this is the convention, and it is the same in other frameworks, such as [Reactive Extensions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.iobservable-1?view=netcore-3.1).

Note that when we subscribe our instances of `MandelbrotLogic` and `JuliaLogic` to our `PixelToComplexConvertLogic`, we provide instances of the rules we implemented last time. For the rest of the components, we provide an instance of `ActivateAllRule`, that is an implementation of `IRule` that allows every event to pass: it always returns `true` from the `IsActivated` method.

A few remarks about the `IComponentBuilder` interface:
* In the far past, there was no interface, but a class named `ComponentBuilder` with 3 methods for building components `BuildListeners`, `BuildLogics`, `BuildDispatchers`, in which one would build components of certain types. There was probably also a method called `LinkComponents` where one would link the server's components.
* In modern versions of the notification server one does not need to implement the interface `IComponentBuilder`. Instead, the framework's user defines their components and their links in a visual tool. This definition is saved as a configuration file. Then the built-in `IComponentBuilder` implementation reads this file and constructs the components and links them accordingly.