---
title: "6. StateDrivenEntity"
date: 2020-09-26T18:48:45-04:00
draft: false
---

Today we are going to talk about one of the most infamous mechanisms of the notification server: `StateDrivenEntity`.

Recall that every notification server can be thought of a gearbox, consisting of components which can be thought as the drive wheels. When our application launches, our notification server is at first not running. We need to perform some action in order to make it start, similarly to how we need to insert an ignition key and turn it in order to start a car engine.

The mechanism that supports this in the notification server framework is called `StateDrivenEntity`. It allows a class to declare a *current state*. The entity also provides an api that allows users to change its state:

```csharp
public interface IStateDrivenEntity
{
    State CurrentState { get; }

    void TransformTo(State state);
}
```

The type `State` is an enum:

```csharp
public enum State
{
    Uninitialized,
    Initialized,
    Started,
    Invalid
}
```

The possible states have the following meaning:
* **Uninitialized** - the entity was created but was not initialized yet. This means that some of the entity's members are not initialized yet.
* **Initialized** - the entity was created, all its members are initialized, but they aren't started yet. For instance, suppose that our entity is a component that uses an HTTP listener to receive requests. When this component's state is *Initialized*, its HTTP listener data member would be initiated, but the component would still not be receiving HTTP requests. This means that a method of the sort `Open` or `Start` of the HTTP listener was not called yet.
* **Started** - the entity was created, all its members are initialized and started. Continuing with the previous example, if the previous component's state is *Started*, it means it is receiving HTTP requests. This means that a method of the sort `Open` or `Start` of the HTTP listener was called.
* **Invalid** - the entity is an invalid state. This usually means that an unhandled exception was thrown when the entity was in one of the previous states.

There is some hierarchy among the states described above: an entity begins with state *Uninitialized*. We can then transform it to any state. However, if we transform it to *Started*, it will first transform to *Initialized* and then to *Started*. Similarly, if an entity is in state *Started*, we can transform it to any state, but if we transform it to *Uninitialized*, it will first transform to *Initialized*, and only then to *Uninitialized*. If an entity is in state *Invalid*, transforming it to any other state will be equivalent to first transforming it to *Unintialized* and then transforming it to the requested state.

There exists an abstract class that users can inherit from in order to implement the `IStateDrivenEntity` interface:
```csharp
public abstract class StateDrivenEntity : IStateDrivenEntity
{
    protected abstract void InnerUninitializedToInitialized();
    protected abstract void InnerInitializedToStarted();
    protected abstract void InnerStartedToInitialized();
    protected abstract void InnerInitializedToUninitialized();
    protected abstract void InnerAnyToInvalid();
    protected abstract void InnerInvalidToUninitialized();

    // ...
}
```

Users can inherit from this class and implement the methods to specify the behavior of their entity when it transforms states. There is also a class called `StateDrivenEntityHelper` which provides an implementation of `StateDrivenEntity` given delegates for each of these methods:

```csharp
public class StateDrivenEntityHelper : StateDrivenEntity
{
    public StateDrivenEntityHelper
        (Action innerUninitializedToInitialized,
         Action innerInitializedToStarted,
         Action innerStartedToInitialized,
         Action innerInitializedToUninitialized,
         Action innerAnyToInvalid,
         Action innerInvalidToUninitialized)
    {
        // ...        
    }
}
```

In the notification server framework, every component class implements `IStateDrivenEntity`, with the help of `StateDrivenEntityHelper`. Each component class contains *virtual* methods with the same signatures as in the definition of `StateDrivenEntity`. For example, here is how an implementation of the state transform methods of a `HttpListener` class:

```csharp
public class HttpListenerComponent : Listener
{
    private HttpListener mListener;
    private readonly string mUrl;

    public HttpListenerComponent(string url)
    {
        mUrl = url;
    }

    private HttpListener CreateHttpListener()
    {
        HttpListener httpListener = new HttpListener();
        httpListener.Prefixes.Add(mUrl);
        return httpListener;
    }

    protected override void InnerUninitializedToInitialized()
    {
        base.InnerUninitializedToInitialized();
        mListener = CreateHttpListener();
    }

    protected override void InnerInitializedToStarted()
    {
        base.InnerInitializedToStarted();

        mListener.Start();
        Task.Run(HandleIncomingConnections);
    }

    protected override void InnerStartedToInitialized()
    {
        base.InnerStartedToInitialized();

        mListener.Stop();
        mListener = CreateHttpListener();
    }

    protected override void InnerInitializedToUninitialized()
    {
        base.InnerInitializedToUninitialized();

        mListener = null;
    }

    public async Task HandleIncomingConnections()
    {
        // ...
    }
}
```

We remark that in `InnerStartedToInitialized` we recreate the `HttpListener`. In principle, we could just call `Stop`, but there is a problem due to an implementation detail: `HttpListener` does not allow calling `Start` after we called `Stop`.

The last thing I want to explain is why I said this mechanism is infamous. The problem here is that C# already defines standard points for initializing your class and for cleaning your class resources: these are the constructor and the [`IDisposable.Dispose`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.idisposable.dispose?view=netcore-3.1) method respectively. The concept of `IStateDrivenEntity` kind of conflicts with these, as your class instance is not in a valid state until you call `TransformTo` with the appropriate state. We are currently still reviewing the current design/implementation of the notification server, and `IStateDrivenEntity` is one of the main concepts there. Think how you would design this differently: this is not an easy problem.